Fitting a model’s parameters with run-at-a-time optimization
============================================================

In this notebook, we’ll fit a simple compartmental model to disease
propagation data. We’ll use a standard optimizer built into the python
``scipy`` library to set two independent parameters to minimize the sum
of squared errors between the model’s timeseries output and data from
the World Health Organization.

About this technique
--------------------

A run-at-a-time optimization runs the simulation forward from a single
starting point, and so only requires an *a-priori* full state estimate
for this initial condition. This makes it especially appropriate when we
only have partial information about the state of the system.

Ingredients:
------------

We’ll use the familiar ``pandas`` library along with ``pysd``, and
introduce the optimization functionality provided by ``scipy.optimize``.

.. code:: ipython2

    %pylab inline
    import pandas as pd
    import pysd
    import scipy.optimize


.. parsed-literal::

    Populating the interactive namespace from numpy and matplotlib


The model that we’ll try to fit is simple ‘Susceptible-Infectious’
model. This model assumes that everyone is either susceptible, or
infectious. It assumes that there is no recovery, or death; and doesn’t
account for changes in behavior due to the presence of the disease. But
it is super simple, and so we’ll accept those limitations for now, until
we’ve seen it’s fit to the data.

.. image:: ../../../source/models/SI Model/SI Model.png
   :width: 600 px

We’ll hold **infectivity** constant, and try to infer values for the
**total population** and the **contact frequency**.

.. code:: ipython2

    model = pysd.read_vensim('../../models/Epidemic/SI Model.mdl')

We’ll fit our model to data from the WHO patient database for Sierra
Leone. We see the standard *S-Shaped* growth in the cumulative
infections curve. As our model has no structure for representing
recovery or death, we will compare this directly to the **Population
Infected with Ebola**. We format this dataset in the notebook `Ebola
Data Loader <>`__.

.. code:: ipython2

    data = pd.read_csv('../../data/Ebola/Ebola_in_SL_Data.csv', index_col='Weeks')
    data.plot();



.. image:: Fitting_with_Optimization_files/Fitting_with_Optimization_8_0.png


Recipe
------

Step 1: Construct an ‘error’ function
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

We’ll begin by constructing a function which takes the model parameters
that we intend to vary, and returns the sum of the squared error between
the model’s prediction and the reported data.

Our optimizer will interact with our parameter set through an ordered
list of values, so our function will need to take this list and unpack
it before we can pass it into our model.

With ``pysd`` we can ask directly for the model components that we’re
interested in, at the timestamps that match our data.

.. code:: ipython2

    def error(param_list):
        #unpack the parameter list 
        population, contact_frequency = param_list
        #run the model with the new parameters, returning the info we're interested in
        result = model.run(params={'total_population':population,
                                   'contact_frequency':contact_frequency},
                           return_columns=['population_infected_with_ebola'],
                           return_timestamps=list(data.index.values))
        #return the sum of the squared errors
        return sum((result['population_infected_with_ebola'] - data['Cumulative Cases'])**2)
    
    error([10000, 10])




.. parsed-literal::

    157977495.47574666



Step 2: Suggest a starting point and parameter bounds for the optimizer
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The optimizer will want a starting point from which it will vary the
parameters to minimize the error. We’ll take a guess based upon the data
and our intuition.

As our model is only valid for positive parameter values, we’ll want to
specify that fact to the optimizer. We know that there must be at least
two people for an infection to take place (one person susceptible, and
another contageous) and we know that the contact frequency must be a
finite, positive value. We can use these, plus some reasonable upper
limits, to set the bounds.

.. code:: ipython2

    susceptible_population_guess = 9000
    contact_frequency_guess = 20
    
    susceptible_population_bounds = (2, 50000)
    contact_frequency_bounds = (0.001, 100)

Step 3: Minimize the error with an optimization function
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

We pass this function into the optimization function, along with an
initial guess as to the parameters that we’re optimizing. There are a
number of optimization algorithms, each with their own settings, that
are available to us through this interface. In this case, we’re using
the L-BFGS-B algorithm, as it gives us the ability to constrain the
values the optimizer will try.

.. code:: ipython2

    res = scipy.optimize.minimize(error, [susceptible_population_guess,
                                          contact_frequency_guess],
                                  method='L-BFGS-B',
                                  bounds=[susceptible_population_bounds,
                                          contact_frequency_bounds])
    res




.. parsed-literal::

          fun: 22200247.95370693
     hess_inv: <2x2 LbfgsInvHessProduct with dtype=float64>
          jac: array([    0.       , -1666.3223505])
      message: 'CONVERGENCE: REL_REDUCTION_OF_F_<=_FACTR*EPSMCH'
         nfev: 66
          nit: 10
       status: 0
      success: True
            x: array([  8.82129606e+03,   8.20459019e+00])



Result
^^^^^^

If we run the simulation with the parameters suggested by the optimizer,
we see that the model follows the general behavior of the data, but is
too simple to truly capture the correct shape of the curve.

.. code:: ipython2

    population, contact_frequency = res.x
    result = model.run(params={'total_population':population,
                               'contact_frequency':contact_frequency},
                       return_columns=['population_infected_with_ebola'],
                       return_timestamps=list(data.index.values))
    
    plt.plot(result.index, result['population_infected_with_ebola'], label='Simulated')
    plt.plot(data.index, data['Cumulative Cases'], label='Historical');
    plt.xlabel('Time [Days]')
    plt.ylabel('Cumulative Infections')
    plt.title('Model fit to Sierra Leone Ebola historical infections data')
    plt.legend(loc='lower right')
    plt.text(2,9000, 'RMSE: 7.5% of Max', color='r', fontsize=12)




.. parsed-literal::

    <matplotlib.text.Text at 0x118352f50>




.. image:: Fitting_with_Optimization_files/Fitting_with_Optimization_16_1.png


.. code:: ipython2

    res




.. parsed-literal::

          fun: 22200247.95370693
     hess_inv: <2x2 LbfgsInvHessProduct with dtype=float64>
          jac: array([    0.       , -1666.3223505])
      message: 'CONVERGENCE: REL_REDUCTION_OF_F_<=_FACTR*EPSMCH'
         nfev: 66
          nit: 10
       status: 0
      success: True
            x: array([  8.82129606e+03,   8.20459019e+00])



.. code:: ipython2

    sqrt(res.fun/len(data))/data['Cumulative Cases'].max()




.. parsed-literal::

    0.075054691238299831



