
SIR Peak Infection Challenge
============================

You are the chief epidemiologist of the
`McMurdo <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/McMurdo_Station>`__ Antartic
Research Station, a scientific outpost with a population of 1000
persons. A new and unusual disease, currently known as penguin foot, has
struck 10 individuals in the camp, and seems to be spreading.

The disease has several properties. While infected (and contagious),
individuals behave as normal but are unable to drive `snow
machines <https://youtu.be/gcIwrdeP21s?t=1m46s>`__, the base's primary
mode of evacuation in case of an emergency. (It is universally
acknowledged that penguins cannot drive snow machines.) Snow machines
can carry one passenger in addition to the driver, and so at any given
time, at least half of the population must be able to drive.

The period of infection is on average 10 days, after which individuals
return to their normal state and are immune to further infection. The
infectivity of the disease is much less well known. The chance of
infection from an encounter between an infected and a non-infected
person could be anywhere from 0.5% to 10%.

As there are no lasting consequences of penguin foot, the base has
continued to operate as normal, with each individual coming into contact
with about 25 people per day, with relatively uniform mixing between
individuals.

The primary danger posed by the disease is that there will come a point
when there aren't enough people to drive snow machines. Your task is to
calculate the maximum number of infections for a range of values of
infectivity between ``.005`` and ``0.1``.

Specifically, you need to know the minimum value of infectivity that is
sufficient to incapacitate over half the base at one time, so that as
new measurements become available, you can assess the risk of this
possibility.

Load libraries
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The cell below gets us started by loading the plotting library.

Add a line to this cell to load the ``pysd`` library using the standard
python
`import <https://www.codementor.io/python/tutorial/python-path-virtualenv-import-for-beginners>`__
`syntax <https://docs.python.org/2/tutorial/modules.html#modules>`__.

.. code:: python

    %pylab inline
    <<...>>

Load model
~~~~~~~~~~

Now, use PySD's ``load_vensim``
`function <http://pysd.readthedocs.io/en/master/functions.html#pysd.read_vensim>`__
to read the SIR model found at relative location:
'``../../models/Epidemic/SIR.mdl``\ ', and name the resulting object
'``model``\ '.

.. code:: python

    model = <<...>>

Just to practice, `run the
model <http://pysd.readthedocs.io/en/master/functions.html#pysd.PySD.run>`__,
using the ``.run()`` function's ``params`` argument to set the value of
``Infectivity`` to ``0.02``.

Save the result in a variable named ``res``.

.. code:: python

    res = model.run(params=<<...>>)

The cell below contains code to plot the result of your simulation.
Execute it and ensure that everything is working properly.

.. code:: python

    res['Infected'].plot()
    plt.xlabel('Days')
    plt.ylabel('Number of Individuals Infected');

Identify the peak for this base case run
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

In the cell below, write an expression to calculate (for your base case)
the `maximum <find%20ref%20to%20pandas%20max>`__ number of individuals
who are infected at any one time. You'll need to use Pandas syntax to
select the column named 'Infected' and then use the Pandas functions
referenced above.

.. code:: python

    peak_value = <<...>>

    print('Up to', int(peak_value), 'individuals are infected at one time.')

Define the range of infectivities we want to sweep over
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

To identify the worst case scenario, we need to sweep over the plausible
values of ``infectivity``, from 0.005 to 0.1, in increments of .005. Our
next step is to generate an array of these values. We can use the python
package `numpy <>`__ which handles matrix mathematics and array
manipulation. (It is common practice to give the numpy module the short
handle '``np``\ ' as I have done below).

You'll specifically want to use the ``np.arange(...)`` function, which
extends the python standard ``range`` function to handle non-integer
values. Consult the `numpy documentation <>`__ to determine the
arguments you'll want to pass in to this function to generate an array
that looks like:

::

    [0.005, 0.01, 0.015, ... 0.095, 0.1]

You may have to be creative to ensure that the last value in the array
is actually ``0.1``.

.. code:: python

    import numpy as np
    infectivity_values = np.arange(<<...>>)
    print(infectivity_values)

Evaluate the peak of infections for each value of infectivity
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

We now want to calculate the peak for the list of possible
infectivities, and collect them in a pair of lists. To do this, write a
for loop that iterates over each value in the array of infectivites.
I've started this off for you below.

Within the body of the for loop, run the model with that value of
infectivity, saving the result to a variable named res. Then use
python's `list append <>`__ syntax to add the appropriate values to the
end of the ``peak_value_list``.

.. code:: python

    peak_value_list = []

    for <<...>>

    peak_value_list

Plot the result
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Now create a plot showing showing the values of infectivity on the
x-axis, and the peak value of the infections on the y axis. Label each
axis, and give the plot a title. From this plot we can eyeball the value
of infectivity beyond which the peak level of infections rises over 500.

.. code:: python

    plt.plot(infectivity_values, peak_value_list)
    plt.grid()
    plt.xlabel('Infectivity')
    plt.ylabel('Peak Value of Infections')
    plt.title('Peak level of infection as a function of infectivity.');

Bonus Activities
----------------

1. Identify the first day that the base might not be able to evacuate,
   for any value of infectivity.
2. Identify the maximum total number of days that the base might be
   unable to evacuate, for the range of values of infectivity listed
   above.
3. Come up with a better story for this example than 'penguin foot'. =)
